<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>
				<a id="chap36">Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>. The Staves which Osberne Taught to the Dalesmen</a>
			</h3>
			<p>Now all folk at Wethermel when they looked upon Osberne’s face deemed that he was bettering of the drearihood which had weighed on him ever since the battle with the strong-thieves, and of that bettering they were right glad, for they were wont to have much joy of his fellowship. Came on therewith the Midsummer Feast of the Cloven Mote, which, as aforesaid, was the greatest of all the feasts of the Dalesmen, and Osberne was there with a countenance of good cheer no worser than the best. Now at this feast not only did they do in the heedfullest and solemnest wise all that belonged to Midsummer, as the Trundling of the Fiery Wheel, and the Kindling of the Bale, and the Leaping through the Fire; but also before noon, and ere these plays were begun, was high mass sung in the goodliest fashion in each of the two churches of Allhallows for the good rest of them who had fallen manfully in battle with the thieves. And last of all, when the summer night was as dark as it would be before the dawn, and the folk of the two sides were all ranged each in a line on their own shore of the river, they sang these staves from side to side across the Sundering Flood, the Westdalers beginning, and then the Eastdalers taking it up:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span class="i2">’Tis Summer and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Little dusk and long light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Little loss and much gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When the day must needs wane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Little bitter, much sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From the weed to the wheat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Little moan, mickle praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the Midsummer days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the love of the sleeping sun lieth along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And broodeth the acres abiding the song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Were the spring to come o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And again as before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What then would ye crave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From the summer to have?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweeter grass would ye pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And more lea-lading hay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For more wheat would ye cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thicker swathe of the rye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stouter sons would ye ask for, and daughters more dear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well-willers more trusty than them ye have here?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">O the wheat is yet green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But full fair beseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the rye groweth tall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By the turfen wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thick and sweet was the hay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On the lealand that lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dear daughters had we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sons goodly to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of all the well-willers ere trusted for true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The least have ye failed us to deal and to do.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">What then is this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That the summer’s bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Somewhat ye fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In your treasure’s tale?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What then have ye lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And what call ye the cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the months of life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Since winter’s strife?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For unseldom the summer sun curseth the Dale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the tears thrust aback and the unuttered wail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Forsooth o’er-well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The tale may we tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Tis the spear and the sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the House of the Sward.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The bright and the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Have gone to their rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And our eyes are blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Their eyes to find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mead and house wend we because they were stayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we stand up because in the earth they were laid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Would ye call them aback</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then, to look on your lack?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Nay, we would that their tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From our hearts ne’er should fail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">This then maketh you sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That such dear death they had?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">This night are we sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For the joy that we had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And their memory’s beginning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Great grief would be winning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But while weareth away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And e’en woe waxeth gay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In fair words is it told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Weighed e’en as fine gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweet as wind of the south</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Grows the speech in the mouth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from father to son speeds the tale of the true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the brave that forbore that the brethren might do.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>When this was sung then each man went home to his house. But it is said that these staves were made by Osberne, and that he taught them to the Western men as well as to the Eastern.</p>
			<div class="pg_body_wrapper">
				<br/>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
